Add Criteria for Design Principles to README (#575)
w3ctag/design-principles: README.md

Contributions are welcome to anyone who follows [our code of conduct](https://www.w3.org/Consortium/cepc/).

When proposing new principles or updating existing ones, please take the [criteria](#criteria) into consideration.
The editors will merge PRs after they have TAG consensus and will attempt to document that consensus
by linking to the meeting minutes. If you notice a change that seems to have been merged without
consensus, please comment on its PR or file an issue, and we'll either quickly find better evidence
or back out the change until we can discuss it more fully.

## Criteria

> These criteria support consistent evaluation of proposed principles. They are not strict rules and may not all apply in every case.

Author: ```suggestion
These criteria support consistent evaluation of proposed principles. They are not strict rules and may not all apply in every case. Principles should be:
```

> These criteria support consistent evaluation of proposed principles. They are not strict rules and may not all apply in every case. Principles should be:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These criteria support consistent evaluation of proposed principles.
They are not strict rules and may not all apply in every case.
Principles should be:
```

* Grounded in patterns from specs, implementations, or real-world web use.
* Evidence-based.
* Generalisable across multiple technologies and use cases, persistent over time.
* Informed by community practices, standards, or observed usage.
* States a clear value or priority, e.g., prefer simplicity, preserve individual/user agency.

> * Compatible with related principles and guidelines, e.g., privacy, ethics, questionnaires, etc.

Author: Thanks. I generally agree re: questionnaire. I was thinking more along the lines of the authors of a principle have taken questionnaires into account (and they may already in any case). What's here is just examples so this works. I've updated your comment with links and committed that.

> * Reflects TAG consensus, considers broader input, and is refined as needed in response to sustained objections.

Author: I don't disagree and I don't have a strong opinion on actually having this point - at least the way it is currently expressed. And, especially if this point is taken as a given. Happy to revise in any case.

Since you've raised concerns on this, going to remove it but would like to ensure that this is also acceptable by @hadleybeeman and @jyasskin as they've originally raised this point in [2025-05-19 meeting](https://github.com/w3ctag/meetings/blob/gh-pages/2025/telcons/05-19-minutes.md#design-principles572-establish-criteria-for-design-principles---csarven):

>Hadley: re consensus, we not only need the editors to put something there but also consensus from the rest of the TAG to publish. I wouldn't want to create or imply more process where random trouble maker to make it difficult for the document to progress. Let it be living as much as it can.

>Jeffrey: General community agreement rather than consensus. Sometimes the TAG may want to override those objections. It should

```suggestion
```

>     e.g., [Privacy Principles](https://www.w3.org/TR/privacy-principles/), [Ethical Web Principles](https://www.w3.org/TR/ethical-web-principles/) etc.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    e.g., [Privacy Principles](https://www.w3.org/TR/privacy-principles/) or [Ethical Web Principles](https://www.w3.org/TR/ethical-web-principles/).
```

Contributions are welcome to anyone who follows [our code of conduct](https://www.w3.org/Consortium/cepc/).

When proposing new principles or updating existing ones, please take the [criteria](#criteria) into consideration.
The editors will merge PRs after they have TAG consensus and will attempt to document that consensus
by linking to the meeting minutes. If you notice a change that seems to have been merged without
consensus, please comment on its PR or file an issue, and we'll either quickly find better evidence
or back out the change until we can discuss it more fully.

## Criteria

The following criteria serve to guide the development of new and existing principles:

* Grounded in patterns observed in specs, implementations, or web content.
* Evidence-based.

> * Applicable across multiple technologies or use cases over time.

Author: Reframes criterion more explicitly:

```suggestion
* Generalisable across multiple technologies and use cases, persistent over time.
```

> * Based on definitions from open standards communities.

Author: Broadening the scope:

```suggestion
* Informed by community practices, standards, or observed usage.
```

> * Expresses a clear value or priority e.g., prefer simplicity, preserve individual/user's agency.

Author: ```suggestion
* Expresses a clear value or priority e.g., prefer simplicity, preserve individual/user's agency, aligned with the Ethical Web Principles.
```

> * Expresses a clear value or priority e.g., prefer simplicity, preserve individual/user's agency, aligned with the Ethical Web Principles.

Author: ```suggestion
* States a clear value or priority, e.g., prefer simplicity, preserve individual/user agency.
```

> * Expresses a clear value or priority e.g., prefer simplicity, preserve individual/user's agency.

Reviewer: This one I like also.  Though I would use prose for this too: We guide our decisions about how to formulate principles based on the EWP.

> * Logically consistent and compatible with other design principles and related guidelines (privacy, ethics, questionnaires, etc.).

Reviewer: This is a second-tier thing, but grounding principles in other work is useful.  That is, citing reasons to help explain and reinforce why something is one way and not the other.

That's a description of how we write good principles more than it is about how we decide on what those principles are.

> * Reflect general agreement within the TAG and broader community.

Author: No doubt that TAG has significant authority and responsibility to guide these principles and make final decisions. However, TAG is not infallible and must actively engage with the broader community. After all, the principles principles serve the entire web ecosystem. I think this is a balanced approach:

```suggestion
* Reflects TAG consensus, considers broader input, and is refined as needed in response to sustained objections.
```

> * Reflect general agreement within the TAG and broader community.

Reviewer: We often cite consensus as a goal and we often strive to attain it, because that makes the work better.  However, I don't regard this as necessary.  If there was something the TAG was convinced was right, we should say that, not be constrained by uncertainty in the broader community.

Off the top of my head, there's nothing that really would change if you included this, but I am not comfortable committing to it.

> * Address objections with sustained discussion or further refinement if needed.

Reviewer: This is just a variation on the same general decision-making process as the previous, and therefore duplicative.
